Doc(eos_designs): Add lab topologies for all examples (#6483)
aristanetworks/ansible-avd: ansible_collections/arista/avd/examples/README.md

---
title: How to use AVD examples  # This title is used for search results

> link: https://avd.arista.com/stable/ansible_collections/arista/avd/examples/index.html

Reviewer: I am not quite sure how this is being used. looking at the full repo we only have it in two places single-dc-l3ls and the ipv6 one.

@JulioPDX can you please take a look and let's clean this up if this is useless

Author: a different PR please!

Reviewer 2: Yeah we can handle that in a different PR, Adding issue #6597 for tracking.

---
<!--

>   ~ Copyright (c) 2025-2026 Arista Networks, Inc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ~ Copyright (c) 2026 Arista Networks, Inc.
```

  ~ Use of this source code is governed by the Apache License 2.0
  ~ that can be found in the LICENSE file.
  -->

# How to use AVD examples

## Introduction

Examples include simple inventories that show how to build common network designs with AVD. AVD examples cover all essential deployment aspects; however, they may be missing some fine-tuning required for a production network. Use them for inspiration, but avoid copying AVD examples into your prod inventory until you fully understand how they work. Be mindful of your production network to keep it healthy.

You can use AVD examples in 2 different ways:

- As an interactive lab (AVD playground)
- As a reference inventory only, without supporting lab

> Some AVD examples are also augmented with guides explaining how they work. However, the most important part of every example is the inventory. Labs and guides are optional.

Reviewer: Why "some" we have guides for all?
Also I don't think that the important part is the inventory (which in ansible world mean one file) I would completely remove this sentence as it is misleading.

Author: I'm thinking about future use cases here "example inventory" != "guide". Cane we keep this for now?

Reviewer 2: This is correct unless we make it a standard to always include clab topo files, maybe possible with future integrations

Reviewer: it sounds bad to be customer facing and stating we have examples without guides. I think all of them have guides today. Why would we stop this?

also once again "inventory" != "the associated variables" in Ansible world it means only inventory file

Reviewer 3: I will remove this sentence altogether.

## AVD Playground

AVD playground is an interactive, Cloud-based lab environment sponsored by Arista. It is enough to authenticate on [labs.arista.com](https://labs.arista.com) and click the button below to start the lab.

[Start AVD Playground :octicons-play-16:](https://labs.arista.com/launch?lab_type=avd-playground&origin=tech-lib){ .md-button .md-button--primary target=_blank}

Once the playground is ready to use, use the interactive menu at the bottom of the [code-server](https://github.com/coder/code-server) UI to pick the AVD release and the example you want to test. Some examples and older AVD releases may not include lab definitions; in that case, the lab selector menu will prompt you to choose a different option. Please select post 6.0 releases only.

!!! tip

    If you don't see the "Start AVD Playground" button present on the guide corresponding to a specific example, this example is not supported in AVD Playground. If this is the case, select a different one.

Once you select an example supported by a lab definition, it will be extracted to the code-server workspace. Open a new terminal and type `make start` to start the lab.

!!! note

>     AVD playgrounds are available only to registered Arista customers with a support contract due to cost and security considerations. Please use the AVD playground for a good cause only and abide by the EULA terms you agreed to during registration. Do the right thing - be an Arista customer! However, if you don't have the required level of access, talk to your Arista account team or [download the lab files](https://aristanetworks.github.io/aclabs/lab_archives/avd-playground.tar.gz) and run the playground locally on your own host. Unfortunately, we will not be able to officially support this type of deployment due to the number of issues that can occur on a random host machine, including missing Linux kernel configuration, misconfigured container engines, privilege issues, etc. The download option is for skilled users only that can manage the environment without extra support.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
!!! note

    AVD playgrounds are only available to registered Arista customers with a support contract due to cost and security considerations.
    Please use AVD playground for good causes only and mind the EULA terms you signed during the registration.
    Do the right thing - be an Arista customer!
    However if you don't have the required level of access, talk to your Arista account team.
```
And as we talked about move the download option to some expert section or remove it completely.

> 

Reviewer 4: same updates as the other one

    Do the right thing - be an Arista customer!
    If you don't have the required level of access, talk to your Arista account team.

For additional documentation regarding AVD playgrounds and other community labs check [aclabs.arista.com](https://aclabs.arista.com/). The corresponding [GitHub repository](https://github.com/aristanetworks/aclabs) is used to build container images powering AVD playgrounds.

AVD playground lab files are available for [download on aclabs.arista.com](https://aristanetworks.github.io/aclabs/lab_archives/avd-playground.tar.gz). The download option is for skilled users only that can manage the environment without extra support.

## AVD as Reference Inventory

If you don't have access to AVD playgrounds, it's enough to build a working Ansible environment with the AVD collection installed to start testing examples.

> You can build an AVD environment by installing all requirements on a dedicated VM or inside a virtual environment / [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/). Please refer to the [installation](../../../../docs/installation/collection-installation.md) section for the details.

Reviewer: I think mentioning uv here is kind of misleading as uv could be used to create a virtual env and so it should not be opposed. Let's simplify 

```suggestion
You can build an AVD environment by installing all requirements on a dedicated VM or inside a virtual environment. Please refer to the [installation](../../../../docs/installation/collection-installation.md) section for the details.
```

Alternatively, you can use the AVD universal container images to quickly spin up a working AVD environment.
Once the environment is ready, you can extract all examples with:

```shell
ansible-playbook arista.avd.install_examples
```

Alternatively, you can copy a specific example to your current directory:

```shell
cp -r /home/${USER}/.ansible/collections/ansible_collections/arista/avd/examples/<example-name>/* .
```

> `/home/${USER}/.ansible/collections/ansible_collections/arista/avd/examples` is the default Ansible path to the AVD collection. It may differ if your environment is not using the default path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! info
    `/home/${USER}/.ansible/collections/ansible_collections/arista/avd/examples` is the default Ansible path to the AVD collection. It may differ if your environment is not using the default path.
```
